Let’s look at some basic examples of the types of graphs you can create for visualizing your data. Bar Charts are great for comparing related data sets or parts of a whole. For example, in this bar chart, you can see the population numbers of 10 different countries and how they compare to one another. Column Charts compare values side-by-side. You can use them quite effectively to show change over time. For example, showing how page views and user sessions time on your website is changing on a month-to-month basis. Although alike, except for the orientation, bar charts and column charts cannot always be used interchangeably. For example, a column chart may be better suited for showing negative and positive values. Pie Charts show the breakdown of an entity into its sub-parts and the proportion of the sub-parts in relation to one another. Each portion of the pie represents a static value or category, and the sum of all categories is equal to hundred percent. In this example, in a marketing campaign with four marketing channels—social sites, native advertising, paid influencers, and live events—you can see the total number of leads generated per channel. Line Charts display trends. They’re great for showing how a data value is changing in relation to a continuous variable. For example, how has the sale of your product, or multiple products, changed over time, where time is the continuous variable. Line charts can be used for understanding trends, patterns, and variations in data; also, for comparing different but related data sets with multiple series. Data visualization can also be used to build dashboards. Dashboards organize and display reports and visualizations coming from multiple data sources into a single graphical interface. You can use dashboards to monitor daily progress or the overall health of a business function or even a specific process. Dashboards can present both operational and analytical data. For example, you could have a marketing dashboard using which you monitor your current marketing campaign for reach-outs, queries generated, and sales conversions, in real-time. As part of the same dashboard, you could also be seeing how the conversion rate of this campaign compares to the conversion rate of some of the successfully run campaigns in the past. Dashboards are a great tool to present a bird’s eye view of the complete picture while also allowing you to drill down into the next level of information for each parameter. Dashboards: are easy to comprehend by an average user make collaboration easy between teams; and allow you to generate reports on the go.
